Code (HTML tags)

Use Robots meta tag
Default value is follow, index
<meta name=”robots” content=[parameter]>
E.g <meta name=”robots” content=[follow,noindex]>
Use canonical link element to avoid duplicate content
If you have the same content on multiple pages on your website, you’ll have duplicate content
A canonical tag (aka "rel canonical") is a way of telling search engines that a specific URL represents the master copy of a page. 
Add canonical url to all pages.
For e.g. crawler can reach a specific page using the following url:
www.pykih.com/mohit
www.pykih.com/mohitnihalani
www.pykih.com/organiziation/mohit
To avoid crawling issues use canonical tags:
Add a rel=canonical link from the non-canonical page to the canonical one. So if we picked the shortest URL as our canonical URL, the other URL would link to the shortest URL in the <head> section of the page – like this:
<link rel="canonical" href="http://pykih.com/mohit/" />
Use descriptive alt tags for the url
Always add alt tags for the images
In case of a linked image, the alt text should be the title of the page it’s linking to.
Alt tag should contain keyphrase.
Use structured data
Use schema.org to loop for structured data markup supported by the search engines.
Use JSON-ld to create structured markup and insert that markup in head of the page:
E.g. markup of recipe
<script type="application/ld+json">
{
  "@context": "http://schema.org",
  "@type": "Recipe",
  "author": "John Smith",
  "cookTime": "PT1H",
  "datePublished": "2009-05-08",
  "description": "This classic banana bread recipe comes from my mom -- the walnuts add a nice texture and flavor to the banana bread.",
  "image": "bananabread.jpg",
  "recipeIngredient": [
    "3 or 4 ripe bananas, smashed",
    "1 egg",
    "3/4 cup of sugar"
  ],
  "interactionStatistic": {
    "@type": "InteractionCounter",
    "interactionType": "http://schema.org/Comment",
    "userInteractionCount": "140"
  },
  "name": "Mom's World Famous Banana Bread",
  "nutrition": {
    "@type": "NutritionInformation",
    "calories": "240 calories",
    "fatContent": "9 grams fat"
  },
  "prepTime": "PT15M",
  "recipeInstructions": "Preheat the oven to 350 degrees. Mix in the ingredients in a bowl. Add the flour last. Pour the mixture into a loaf pan and bake for one hour.",
  "recipeYield": "1 loaf",
  "suitableForDiet": "http://schema.org/LowFatDiet"
}
</script>
Use tools such as Structure Data testing to check any errors in JSON-LD.
Add keywords on the h1 tag of the page.
Include meta tags such as meta description and meta title and make sure these contains keywords.
Make sure that title tag of every page is different.
Add descriptive anchor text.
Anchor text which links to other pages should contain keywords of the page and should describe what the page is about.
Never just link the url.
Use geo meta tags to let search engines know your location.
While creating pagination always add rel=”next” and rel=”prev” in the link tag.

Images
Preparing your Images
Find and select the right image.
Always find unique and original images which matches your mission or topic of content.
Choose a right file name
Google uses the file name to determine what an image is about. That’s why you should use your focus keyphrase in the image file name.
Note that you should always start your file name with your main keyphrase
Choose right Format

Format
Usefulness
JPEG
larger photos or illustrations
PNG
To preserve background transparency


WebP
Produce high-quality results with smaller file sizes
SVG
For logos and icons

Scale your images
Resize all the images to the size you want to display.
Resize your images	
Make sure that scaled image is compressed so it is served in the smallest file size possible.
Reduce the size of images is by removing the Exif data
Tools are mentioned in tools section.
Use responsive image.
This means you serve a different image per screen width.
For example, with responsive images, you serve a small image to visitors using a mobile device, while for the same article, you serve a larger image to visitors using a larger screen desktop

Url’s
Describe your content
A user should be able to make an accurate guess about the content of a web page simply by reading the URL.
To accomplish this, a URL should include an accurate phrase or term that pertains to the page content.
Include Keywords in URL.
Use hyphens to separate words
Use lowercase letters
Keep urls short
Always use absolute url not the relative ones.
Use subdirectory structure rather than subdomain structure.
Better: http://www.example.com/topic
Not - optimized: http://topic.example.com
Minimize dynamic url strings
Make correct use of canonical tags.
Modify URLs so that they don’t look like they’re pointing to dynamic pages.
Fix the problem by removing characters such as ?, #, !, *, %, and & and reducing the number of parameters to one.
If there are such types of url use mod_rewrite to create restful URL architecture.



Robots.txt
Use only to block the complete sub-directory otherwise search engine will not be able to crawl sites and this will impact rank.
Never prevent crawlers to crawl css and js file until necessary.
List all the XML sitemaps. (important)
Use google search console to check and validate robots.txt file.

XML sitemaps
Create xml sitemaps which contains all the URL of the page.
Add this sitemap on google webmaster which helps google to crawl all your pages.
Format of XML sitemap is 

Should contain location tag.
Should accurately reflect your site protocol (http or https) and if you have chosen to include or exclude www.
Last modified date
Priority Tag
Limitations of XML sitemap
A maximum of 50000 urls
Uncompressed file size of 50mb
After creating sitemap add them to google, yahoo and bing webmaster tools.
Add your sitemap path to robots.txt file.

Optimizing sitemap
Only include SEO relevant pages in sitemap.
Exclude:
Non-canonical pages.
Duplicate pages.
Paginated pages.
Parameter or session ID based URLs.
Site search result pages.
Reply to comment URLs.
Share via email URLs.
URLs created by filtering that are unnecessary for SEO.
Archive pages.
Any redirections (3xx), missing pages (4xx) or server error pages (5xx).
Pages blocked by robots.txt.
Pages with noindex.
Resource pages accessible by a lead gen form (e.g., white paper PDFs).
Utility pages that are useful to users, but not intended to be landing pages (login page, contact us, privacy policy, account pages, etc.).
If number of url exceeds then use sitemap index file.
Use descriptive sitemap names that reflect your site structure. 
Don’t set the sitemap name as sitemap1, sitemap2, sitemap3, instead follow the structure of your website and name accordingly,
Such as project sitemap should be /sitemap/projects, organization should be /sitemap/organization.
If you have video in the website then create a seperate video sitemap.

.htaccess file:
Create a page in which the errors will return from. Example:
	T
Redirect all the error codes to the following page:


Metrics for Checking

Speed
Loading time of the site should be less.
Tools for site-speed:-
Web page test
Google PageSpeed Insights
Google lighthouse
Pingdom tools
Things to improve site-speed:-
Enable compression of your website file using compressing tools such as GZIP.
Minify css, javascript, HTML
Reduce redirects
Remove render blocking javascript
Security
Website secured with SSL.
Use of HTTPS over HTTPS.
Crawlability
Accessibility
Test your site with disabling styles
See if the quality and semantics of HTML are done right.
There is a logical grouping of elements and the structure is clear
Unplug your mouse and use the keyboard for navigation
Any user interface, including websites, should be fully operable regardless of the device used to interact with. 
Check the contrast
The most frequently used requirement for this is to guarantee a contrast of at least 4.5:1 between text and background.
Very big text can have a lower ratio of 3:1.
Check contrast on color contrast analyser.
Use accessibility evaluation tools
Webaim Wave 
Deque Axe
Conversion Rate Optimization
User Testing
Perform A/B testing
Consider putting a small survey and visitors some questions such as. ‘What’s the goal of your visit today?’ Or: ‘What’s keeping you from buying this product?’.



Tools

FOR
Tools
Keyphrase Searching
Using Google Adwords Keyword Planner, 
Yoast Suggest
Google Trends
Internal search engine
Answerthepublic
Bing keyword Research

Sitespeed Checking
Web page test
Google PageSpeed Insights
Google lighthouse
Pingdom tools			

Structured Data
JSON-LD
Schema.org	
google structured data markup

Structured Data testing
Structure Data testing			

SEO Tools 
Google analytics, google search console
Crawlability Check
Google search console.
Accessibility evaluation tools
Webaim Wave 
Deque Axe

User testing for CRO (conversion rate optimization)
 abtestguide.com.
Reducing image file size
ImageOptim
JPEGmini
jpeg.io
Kraken.io		

Compression of File
GZIP.
Mobile friendly test
Mobile friendly test
Google Webmaster
https://www.google.com/webmasters/#?modal_active=none
Sitemap
Sitemap Index
Schema Sitemap
Creating Site Map
Submitting Sites
Google
Bing
Page Speed
Google Page Speed
Website Crawler
Screaming Frog
A/B Testing
AB Test Guide.


Mobile Friendliness
Is your website compatible with mobile.
Test loading time on mobile devices.
Design for mobile
Don't use flash and pop ups.
Use google Mobile friendly test to check mobile friendly.
Responsive Design
Site should be adjustable on the screen on which it is viewed on.
Do not restrict users to view content.
Dynamic Serving 
With this method, you have two versions of your Web site: one for smartphones, and another for larger devices. The Web server decides which version to send when a page is requested.
Separate Urls:
In this case, you have two versions of your site. The server directs the user to the most appropriate site, on a different URL, depending on the device.
https://moz.com/learn/seo/mobile-optimization

Keywords:

Use keywords in folder names and filenames, and in page files and image files.
Use keywords near top of the page.
Place keywords into <H> (heading) tag.
Use bold and italic keywords.
Keywords should be between 1%-5% of the page overall content.
Use keywords in meta tags of the page.
Only one keyword or keyphrase per page.
Use different keyphrase or keyword for different pages.
Links between pages within your site contain keywords.
Use synonyms and different word forms such as singulars and plurals instead of just 
Use tools such as 
Google Adwords Keywords Planner
Bing Keywords Research Tool


Site Structure:

Identify most important pages/projects of the website.
Link most important pages from home pages.
Minimize cluttering the homepage.
Logo links to the homepage.
Descriptive navigation links.
Is the internal anchor text used in navigation links descriptive and aligned with keyword goals?.
Divide content in Categories and Sub-Categories
Add categories on the homepage and also on the main menu of the site.
Name of the category should resemble the search terms used by your audience.
Thumb rule for categories is that no category should be twice the size of any other category.
Are all targeted keywords properly represented in site navigation.
Create Easy Navigation for the users:
Breadcrumbs
Visible above the title of the post.
Tags
Limit the amount of tags you use;
Make sure tags are used more than one/two
Make sure tags are visible.
Make sure every pages contains some links to other pages.
Anchor tags should be clear and specific. It should reflect the context of the page it is linked to.
Anchor text is one of the most important, specify the page heading in this.
Identify the corner store pages and create most links toward that.
URL structure should be in harmony with the site navigation structure,
Make sure don't use canonical tags in the paginated pages.
Primary target distance.
Run a screaming frog crawl and filter content by html and sort crawl ascending  and check if there are any important pages more then two levels of the homepage.



UX:

Do’s
Don’ts
Make your buttons look like buttons
Don’t write: ‘Click here to (…)’.Button should state clear call-to-action, for example: ‘buy this product’, ‘contact us’, ‘log in’, ‘activate’, and ‘download’.
Links should have a different color than the rest of the text, but this shouldn’t be the only visual means of indicating it’s a link
Don’t make users guess where their click takes them
Communicate with the words your users use
Make the items descriptive. Don’t call an item ‘employment opportunities’, call it ‘jobs’.
make sure important pages on your site are no more than three clicks away from your homepage.




Make sure people can always find their way back out of the rabbit hole they go into.


Provide users with some kind of map which they can use to navigate. For e.g. using breadcrumbs.


If there is a search box, make it easier to find.




Copywriting:
Checklist to keep in mind while writing your post:
Length
Your text contains 300 to 800 words.
Preparation
Your text has a clear purpose.
Your central message is clear and formulated at the correct places.
You use a tone appropriate for your audience.
Keyword
You use your keywords at the right places.
You use your keyword an adequate amount of times.
Structure
The subtopics of your text are discussed in a logical order.
Your paragraphs are well-structured.
In each paragraph, you discuss only one topic.
You use subheadings correctly.
Readability
You use synonyms to avoid using the same word over and over.
Your sentences are not too long.
Your sentences show variation in length, structure and beginning words.
You use transition words correctly.
Your paragraphs are of adequate length.
You avoid passive voice whenever possible
You avoid complex words whenever possible
Style
Your writing style is consistent.
You use concrete language.
You use examples correctly (if applicable).
You use asides correctly (if applicable).
The humor you used is appropriate (if applicable).
Metaphors and expressions are used in moderation (if applicable).
After you started with an anecdote or case study, you have rounded things up in the final paragraph (if applicable).
Typography

